---
title: "Why Samizdat"
date: 2021-10-29T21:34:22-03:00
type: article
description: Where it all started.
---

The world is a mess right now. Wars, viruses, wars on viruses, you name it! Tomorrow somebody will invent something even whackier. There is plenty of stuff just waiting around the corner to happen. Solar flares, Yelowstone, meteors, the Second Coming. Ladies and gentleman, make your bets! But be careful, because "life is stranger than fiction".

However, when _hasn't_ the world been a mess? From what I reckon, at least after that incident involving a fruit and a sleazy reptile. And what was a while ago already! Some say that it has been social media that just found the correct dial to crank all our anxieties up to eleven. That most certainly is the case. However, those who argue that also normally have in their hearts the desire to regulate the social media menace, just like weapons and cigarettes.

Indeed, I can see the similarities. Just like cigarettes, the Web, from message boards to TikTok, can be insidiously addictive and just like weapons, it has the potential to allow true revolutions. In fact, it is quite obvious that we _are_ in the middle of such revolution. Never before has the "common man in the street" had such a huge audience of like-minded people around the world. The shackles of "top-down" media of the XX century (and before) have largely been overcome by the plasticity of the Web (plus some very clever search algorithms). This has opened the door to a "bottom-up" style of media to which humanity is still in the tortuous process of adapting to it.

This is a huge change in the average man's way of life! As such, it is normal that many of us feel uneasy by it. It's just like sitting on the middle of a rollercoaster ride: it is not for the faint of heart. Indeed, just how many kinds of whackos haven't we seen recently? QAnon, flat earthers, MGTOWs, furries, people who still believe Jussie Smolette... the list is long and scattered through all creeds, political views, nationalities and shoe sizes. The temptation for censorship is beyond understandable.

However, when has that really worked? Censorship has the very paradoxical effect of validating the whackos. "Why are we being persecuted?", they ask. "Because, of course, we are right and they can't deny it!". Indeed, censorship is no more an argument than a good punch to the gut and might as well have the same effect. Besides, the martyrdom that accompanies the suffering is a potent fuel for further radicalization. Therefore, unless someone is willing to bring total anihilation upon the now-resented and now-validated whackos, the problem has just become worse. No wonder censorship is historically associated with the bad guys.

However, it seems that such a simple argument cannot penetrate the thick skull of Silicon Valley and its associates. Maybe it's because they think they are better than anybody because of their shiny algorithms and their billions of dollars. Maybe because they are power-hungry lunatics. Most probably it is a mix of both: _vanitas_ is a good companion to _superbia_. Anyway, they are also a bunch of whackos, but whackos with a finger on the bomb trigger. The balkanization of ideas is accelerating at every passing month, like a train towards a precipice. Yet, there is no hope for a change of course from our overlords.

SAMIZDAT was created as an answer to this tower of insanity. It embraces the centuries-old idea that technology is essentially _amoral_ (not immoral!). It embraces the idea that free and unhindered speech is not only a fundamental human right but also the best path towards peace, if it is ever attainable. Finally, it embraces the idea that censorship is ultimately a quixotic endeavor. It's in the very name. Even in the deepest winter of repression in the Soviet Union, there still _was_ some kind of free exchange of ideas in the form of zealously concealed handwritten books (the press and even typewriters were off limits). It was named _Samizdat_, meaning "self-publishing". It was a key factor in the fall of the Soviet block, since it allowed those who dared to see the regime for the sham it really was. Solzhenitsin's classic "Gulag Archipelago", for example, started in _Samizdat_.

SAMIZDAT, the project, takes the inspiration from these horrible times to create a place for all, whackos and non-whackos alike. It uses content addressing and local caching so that you don't need a server running at all times to serve content. Those who access the content can also serve it for others. There are even mechanisms for people to _actively_ mirror other people's content, if they think it is worth their while. Thus, content that is loved tends to persist. Besides, all communication is done in such a way that intermediaries would have a really hard time trying to discover what is circulating in the network. This goes beyond mere TLS and public-key crypto: it is as if even Facebook couldn't see your Facebook post.

Lastly, all this is done in such a way to provide the end-user with the standard Web experience of the browser. If you are reading this, you are already using SAMIZDAT, albeit behind a proxy. It works just like a normal blog, but it it everything but that. For the _real_ SAMIZDAT experience, you can [download it](~/install) and run it in your computer (or phone, in the future) today. The installation requires no input; just set it and forget it. 

However, I am but a humble human and SAMIZDAT is yet in its first fledgling steps. If you like the idea why not start your very own blog today in the SAMIZDAT network? ~~Guinea pigs~~ Beta testers are very important for the maturity of any project. If you instead think you are no James Joyce but are a vagabond with more than 5 boring minutes of free time a day, why not [join the cause](https://github.com/tokahuke/samizdat) and contribute with code, features, PRs, all that meaty stuff? There is still plenty to be done.

It is a hard road ahead, but one worth taking.